A briefcase full of poop changed my life.
Ten years ago, I was a graduate student
and I was helping judge
a genetic engineering competition
for undergrads.
There, I met a British artist and designer
named Alexandra Daisy Ginsberg.
She was wearing the white
embroidered polo shirt
of the University of Cambridge team
and holding a silver briefcase,
like the kind that you would imagine
is handcuffed to your wrist.
She gestured over from a quiet corner
and asked me if I wanted to see something.
With a sneaky look,
she opened up the suitcase,
and inside were six glorious,
multicolored turds.
The Cambridge team, she explained,
had spent their summer
engineering the bacteria E. coli
to be able to sense different things
in the environment
and produce a rainbow
of different colors in response.
Arsenic in your drinking water?
This strain would turn green.
She and her collaborator,
the designer James King,
worked with the students and imagined
the different possible scenarios
of how you might use these bacteria.
What if, they asked, you could use them
as a living probiotic drink
and health monitor, all in one?
You could drink the bacteria
and it would live in your gut,
sensing what's going on,
and then in response to something,
it would be able to produce
a colored output.
Holy shit!
The Cambridge team went on to win
the International Genetically Engineered
Machine competition,
or iGEM for short.
And as for me, those turds
were a turning point.
I am a synthetic biologist,
which is probably a weird term
that most people aren't familiar with.
It definitely sounds like an oxymoron.
How can biology, something natural,
be synthetic?
How can something artificial be alive?
Synthetic biologists sort of poke holes
in that boundary that we draw between
what is natural and what's technological.
And every year, iGEM students
from all over the world
spend their summer
trying to engineer biology
to be technology.
They teach bacteria how to play sudoku,
they make multicolored spider silk,
they make self-healing concrete
and tissue printers
and plastic-eating bacteria.
Up until that moment, though,
I was a little bit more concerned
with a different kind of oxymoron.
Just plain old genetic engineering.
The comedian Simon Munnery once wrote
that genetic engineering is actually
insulting to proper engineering.
Genetic engineering is more like throwing
a bunch of concrete and steel in a river
and if somebody can walk across,
you call it a bridge.
And so synthetic biologists
were pretty worried about this,
and worried that genetic engineering
was a little bit more art that science.
They wanted to turn genetic engineering
into a real engineering discipline,
where we could program cells and write DNA
the way that engineers write
software for computers.
That day 10 years ago started me on a path
that gets me to where I am now.
Today, I'm the creative director
at a synthetic biology company
called Ginkgo Bioworks.
"Creative director" is a weird title
for a biotech company
were people try to program life
the way that we program computers.
But that day when I met Daisy,
I learned something about engineering.
I learned that engineering
isn't really just about equations
and steel and circuits,
it's actually about people.
It's something that people do,
and it impacts us.
So in my work,
I try to open up new spaces
for different kinds of engineering.
How can we ask better questions,
and can we have better conversations
about what we want
from the future of technology?
How can we understand the technological
but also social and political
and economic reasons
that GMOs are so polarizing
in our society?
Can we make GMOs that people love?
Can we use biology to make technology
that's more expansive and regenerative?
I think it starts by recognizing
that we, as synthetic biologists,
are also shaped by a culture
that values "real engineering"
more than any of the squishy stuff.
We get so caught up in circuits
and what happens inside of computers,
that we sometimes lose sight of the magic
that's happening inside of us.
There is plenty of shitty
technology out there,
but this was the first time
that I imagined poop as technology.
I began to see that synthetic
biology was awesome,
not because we could turn
cells into computers,
but because we could bring
technology to life.
This was technology that was visceral,
an unforgettable vision
of what the future might hold.
But importantly, it was also
framed as the question
"Is this the kind of future
that we actually want?"
We've been promised a future of chrome,
but what if the future is fleshy?
Science and science fiction
help us remember
that we're made of star stuff.
But can it also help us remember
the wonder and weirdness
of being made of flesh?
Biology is us,
it's our bodies, it's what we eat.
What happens when biology
becomes technology?
These images are questions,
and they challenge what we think of
as normal and desirable.
And they also show us
that the future is full of choices
and that we could choose differently.
What's the future of the body, of beauty?
If we change the body,
will we have new kinds of awareness?
And will new kinds of awareness
of the microbial world
change the way that we eat?
The last chapter of my dissertation
was all about cheese that I made
using bacteria that I swabbed
from in between my toes.
I told you that the poop changed my life.
I worked with the smell artist
and researcher Sissel Tolaas
to explore all of the ways
that our bodies and cheese are connected
through smell and therefore microbes.
And we created this cheese
to challenge how we think
about the bacteria
that's part of our lives
and the bacteria
that we work with in the lab.
We are, indeed, what we eat.
The intersection of biology and technology
is more often told as a story
of transcending our fleshy realities.
If you can upload
your brain to a computer,
you don't need to poop anymore after all.
And that's usually a story
that's told as a good thing, right?
Because computers are clean,
and biology is messy.
Computers make sense and are rational,
and biology is an unpredictable tangle.
It kind of follows from there
that science and technology
are supposed to be rational,
objective
and pure,
and it's humans that are a total mess.
But like synthetic biologists poke holes
in that line between nature
and technology,
artists, designers and social scientists
showed me that the lines that we draw
between nature, technology and society
are a little bit softer
than we might think.
They challenge us to reconsider
our visions for the future
and our fantasies
about controlling nature.
They show us how our prejudices,
our hopes and our values
are embedded in science and technology
through the questions that we ask
and the choices that we make.
They make visible the ways
that science and technology are human
and therefore political.
What does it mean for us
to be able to control life
for our own purposes?
The artists Oron Catts and Ionat Zurr
made a project
called "Victimless Leather,"
where they engineered
a tiny leather jacket
out of mouse cells.
Is this jacket alive?
What does it take to grow it
and keep it this way?
Is it really victimless?
And what does it mean
for something to be victimless?
The choices that we make
in what we show and what we hide
in our stories of progress,
are often political choices
that have real consequences.
How will genetic technologies
shape the way that we understand ourselves
and define our bodies?
The artist Heather Dewey-Hagborg
made these faces
based on DNA sequences
she extracted from sidewalk litter,
forcing us to ask questions
about genetic privacy,
but also how and whether
DNA can really define us.
How will we fight against
and cope with climate change?
Will we change the way
that we make everything,
using biological materials
that can grow and decay alongside us?
Will we change our own bodies?
Or nature itself?
Or can we change the system
that keeps reinforcing those boundaries
between science, society,
nature and technology?
Relationships that today keep us
locked in these unsustainable patterns.
How we understand and respond to crises
that are natural, technical
and social all at once,
from coronavirus to climate change,
is deeply political,
and science never happens in a vacuum.
Let's go back in time
to when the first European settlers
arrived in Hawaii.
They eventually brought their cattle
and their scientists with them.
The cattle roamed the hillsides,
trampling and changing
the ecosystems as they went.
The scientists catalogued the species
that they found there,
often taking the last specimen
before they went extinct.
This is the Maui hau kuahiwi,
or the Hibiscadelphus wilderianus,
so named by Gerrit Wilder in 1910.
By 1912, it was extinct.
I found this specimen
in the Harvard University Herbarium,
where it's housed with five million
other specimens from all over the world.
I wanted to take a piece
of science's past,
tied up as it was with colonialism,
and all of the embedded ideas
of the way that nature and science
and society should work together,
and ask questions about science's future.
Working with an awesome team at Ginkgo,
and others at UC Santa Cruz,
we were able to extract
a little bit of the DNA
from a tiny sliver of this plant specimen
and to sequence the DNA inside.
And then resynthesize a possible version
of the genes that made
the smell of the plant.
By inserting those genes into yeast,
we could produce little bits of that smell
and be able to, maybe, smell
a little bit of something
that's lost forever.
Working again with Daisy
and Sissel Tolaas,
my collaborator on the cheese project,
we reconstructed and composed
a new smell of that flower,
and created an installation
where people could experience it,
to be part of this natural history
and synthetic future.
Ten years ago, I was a synthetic biologist
worried that genetic engineering
was more art than science
and that people were too messy
and biology was too complicated.
Now I use genetic engineering as art
to explore all the different ways
that we are entangled together
and imagine different possible futures.
A fleshy future
is one that does recognize
all those interconnections
and the human realities of technology.
But it also recognizes
the incredible power of biology,
its resilience and sustainability,
its ability to heal and grow and adapt.
Values that are so necessary
for the visions of the futures
that we can have today.
Technology will shape that future,
but humans make technology.
How we decide what that future will be
is up to all of us.
Thank you.